healthcare is such a broad thing that
can go wrong in so many ways it's
operating under uncertainty and human
beings we know are not very good at that
and so
there's ways to move forward but i think
it's going to take a long time
[Music]
welcome to back to the future podcast my
name is victor savia and i talk with
brilliant minds and hearts of people who
want to uproot and transform the current
health and wellness paradigm
good morning good afternoon good evening
today we have travis christopherson
[Music]
travis christopherson has a degree in
molecular biology and a master's degree
in material engineering and science he's
a full-time science writer and published
the best-selling book tripping over the
truth which shows how the metabolic
theory of cancer is overturning one of
medicine's most entrenched paradigms
he's the founder of the foundation for
metabolic cancer therapies and the
co-founder of care oncology
[Music]
travis thank you so much for making the
time thanks for having me victor i'm
happy to be here can you tell us about
uh why did you decide to go into
molecular biology when you started off
you know my entry is kind of
non-traditional i i came into college
having no idea
what inspired me and really
directionless rudderless and i happened
to take molecular biology 101 from this
wonderful man he was a he was a um he
got his phd at princeton and he sent the
first monkey into space he was on the
cover of life magazine and he started
the class off by
this incredible he started off with
supernova explosions in outer space and
how heavy elements are created which are
you know the foundation for life to form
carbon and nitrogen and oxygen and went
from there and prebiotic evolution and
multicellularity and i was just
completely enamored by that story by
that
you know that we are we are just this
sort of manifestation of a universe that
tends towards order right and from then
on i just couldn't get enough i i was
just fascinated how the body works and
you know back then this is the mid 90s
we we were just sorting to see sequence
genomes and understand the role of dna
and how dna evolved and you know from
then until now that the evolution of
thought and what we've learned has just
been spectacular but i've always just
been attracted to it it's just it to me
was a fascinating topic i think it's
it's a real privilege to choose your
career based on fascination and based on
this experience of amazement because
many people just choose it because their
parents did or because it's a good way
to make money and be part of this
industrial society but i think that
curiosity and those things really drive
not only the motivation but also the
creativity to you know really uh have
your say into how these fields evolve
you can't have it any other way i tell
my kids that all the time and that's
that's one of the most you know sort of
profound lessons that i've learned in
life is you there is no replacing
inspiration curiosity and passion you
just can't when you're not truly
inspired by a subject you're only going
to go so far you know you're just sort
of ticking boxes but if you're really
really inspired and passionate that's
when you you get those sort of paranoid
shifting changes that change the world
frankly what got you to to write
tripping over the truth what was that
curiosity fascination that drove you
there you know tripping over the truth i
was i was in my i think early 40s and it
was it was really a midlife crisis i was
in a vocation i wasn't happy with again
back to this inspiration sort of theme
but i was looking to re-enter the world
of that i loved which is biochemistry
molecular biology and i had not finished
my master's i had three credits left and
the university where i was at was nice
enough to give me an independent study
class and so let me choose my own topic
and i was just happened to be leafing
leafing through kindle one day and i saw
this book called cancer as a metabolic
disease and it was 70 and i hovered over
it i almost didn't click it because it
was so much money i finally did and i
read it you know it's this huge
comprehensive almost textbook like like
tomb of work and read it within that day
re-read it i think two or three days
later and what that book really was was
it was by thomas safer to boston college
it was this
non-standard look at cancer theory and
when i had been in college cancer was it
was just unquestionable that cancer was
a disease of genetic mutations it's
called the somatic mutation theory of
cancer and everybody was taught that it
was dogmatic and this looked at cancer
from a completely different angle that
the mutations were in effect a side
effect of a more prime cause of cancer
which tom swayford asserted was
metabolic dysfunction or damage to these
energy producing little organelles
called mitochondria and the data that
was laid out was just was so fascinating
there was decades and decades really a
half century of data that you could look
at in this kind of story format to
support tom's assertion and so that you
know and nobody was talking about this
at the time it was very he had just come
out with the book i think was 2012. and
um so i did my thesis on that i just
dove into it and that inspired the book
and that you know tom had written this
textbook and i think the emperor
maladies had just come out which is
another very extremely comprehensive
book on the story of cancer where we are
went through the entire history to where
we arrived today and so i thought that
tom's book really lended itself well to
that story-like format because it's a
redemption story there was a german
scientist in the 20s that claimed
metabolism was a prime cause of cancer
this guy named otto warburg and
he was really dismissed he was he was a
brilliant scientist regarded as one of
the finest biochemists in the 20th
century and you know won nobel prizes
was nominated for more but this ca his
cancer theory was discarded and looked
at this sort of stain in his career and
then it made his this resounding
comeback in the you know 90s 2000s from
tom seyfried and is still making a
comeback it's still an evolving story
it's amazing that uh you know
siddhartha's mukherjee's emperor of
all maladies as a biography
it's interesting how and you know this
because you're also a journalist if you
try to tell the life of someone
you are all in a sense your own lenses
are creating what the story should look
like and you've referenced how this book
basically just deals with cancer as a
genetic disease i think it's interesting
that you know we we i think there's
there's there's an update coming from
for the book and i'm sure they will they
will integrate new things uh but you
know i'm curious about what would you
have written about cancer if you would
have undertaken that massive work of
doing a biography of cancer well i think
he left off in my you know humble
opinion siddhartha mukherjee did a
brilliant job of the history and i never
ever could even hope to replicate that
he's one of the best non-fiction science
writers in the world i think but when he
when you come up to the 21st century and
you look at the data he briefly touches
on the data from the cancer genomas
project which was a project that was
kicked off on the heels of the human
genome project right the human genome
project was this project to sequence the
dna of a single human to look at our
genetic code the entire the entirety of
22 000 genes the sequencing technology
progressed so far by 2006 it was
feasible to kick off a project where you
sequence a genome of cancer cells and we
could finally
find the genes that were thought to be
responsible for cancer and it was very
much thought because of work in the 80s
90s that we'd find a very defined sort
of sequence of genes that was
responsible for each type of cancer
there of course there could be some
variation but it would make sense you'd
be able to draw a line from cause to
effect what the cancer genome atlas
project showed which ended in 2015 was
there was way way more what we call
intertumoral heterogeneity that was
thought and that is when you look at the
genetic mutations from one person's
cancer to the next person's cancer to
the next person's cancer
and you that very fundamental idea that
you need to have cause and effect in my
mind was kind of thrown out the window
because you'd have samples of cancer
that just didn't make sense they'd have
some with no mutations some with no
mutations to driver genes which are the
ones that are thought to be responsible
some with one or two mutations to driver
genes and he didn't really touch on that
he didn't go into this confusion that
was created and i think there's some
institutional inertia from that you know
you have millions of dollars of sequence
machines you have people's publications
and lifetimes of work dedicated to this
theory and slowly it's trickled out you
know there's an article not too long ago
i think in nature that the cancer genome
atlas project prompts a rethink in
cancer biology um so i if i would have
done it you know in hindsight 2020 but i
would like to see more of that of this
confusion created and sort of the
shifting of paradigms of thought about
what cancer truly is it seems that for
paradigms to shift we also need
outsiders to come in and poke into the
paradigm of the disease or whatever and
have a few says like warburg himself was
a physique was a physicist not not a
physician and i think we're seeing that
also with other
like davis also who's stepping into
as a physicist to explain all these
things uh into the concert paradigm how
can we still or or better how can we
keep co-creating new paradigms and
inviting outsiders to the conversation
without dismissing them as
outsiders and you know like less
knowledgeable about what we're talking
about yeah now yeah no paul davies is a
very interesting story yeah and he
was conscripted into the cancer effort
in 2000 i believe 2006 and anna barker
who was then the deputy director of the
nci national cancer institute she was
very frustrated by the lack of progress
in treating cancer and she thought just
like like you said we need people to
look at this with fresh eyes and she
conscripted physicists for the reason
that that's what they do they look at
these very complex data sets and try to
make sense of them right and paul davies
is you know he's a very high level
physicist he worked with stephen hawking
for a while
so him and charlie lineweaver were one
of these i think six sites where they
call uh cancer physical science cancer
centers and that was the idea you know
they really weren't given any straight
jacket and what they had to do is just
just try to look at cancer and come up
with new ideas and so when paul davies
looked at it the first thing you did was
look at the data from the cancer genome
atlas project and just said this is
crazy because this is insane to try to
look at these try to make sense out of
perito bytes you know insane amounts of
data and make sense of what cancer is
and you look at what a cancer cell looks
like right and it's remarkably
consistent there's these hallmark
features of cancer which is the most
cited paper in cancer biology they show
these very consistent features over they
have replicative immortality they evade
the immune system they shift their
metabolism to glycolysis they do all
this stuff consistently now just coming
from the somatic mutation theory to
think that a random series of mutations
could reinvent this consistency over
time seemed absurd to him and that's
what he said he's and he said his quote
was there's never been a clear example
in science of looking at the trees and
expense of the forest of focusing on the
trees at the expense of the forest as we
with cancer biology so to me that was
almost validation that came after i
wrote my book and i was like i'm just
waiting for someone to say here's what
you got wrong this is what you got wrong
right but when you know a physicist at
davies levels looked at this and said no
you guys there's some very severe
problems with this theory we need to
think about other theories and his
theory to me makes a ton of sense which
is that cancer is really an activism
meaning that you look at it from this
view of how life evolved on earth and
again he goes back to this quote from
domansky that nothing nothing in biology
makes sense except for in the light of
evolution so when you look at how life
evolved for the majority of the time in
the planet there were single cell
organisms and their imperative is
replicative immortality divide divide
divide then a single event happened and
this is what happened was this is
another biochemist that came up with
this um that event was
mitochondria came the embossin by
symbiotic theory where
a bacterial cell became endogenous into
another bacteria they divided up labor
and one of the bacteria became devoted
to energy metabolism and that was became
mitochondria that allowed for
multicellular life to kick off and what
that entailed was
cells now to sign contracts essentially
with each other to give up replicated
immortality to live within a collective
a cooperative and these are very tenuous
contracts they're tumor suppressor genes
right when that breaks down that leads
back this so evolution sort of goes a
vector backwards leads back to the state
of replicated immortality and it's very
interesting you know this is something
that didn't doesn't get brought up a lot
but when you look at how genes
expressions shift in the cancer cell
they shift back to an early embryonic
state and early embryo
early embryonic cells look just like
cancer cells they evade the immune
system they're highly glycolytic they
exhibit replicative immortality so it's
not that cancer is being invented by
mutations every time it's an activistic
reversion back to a cell which makes it
you know makes a lot of sense when you
look at all the all the data just a
short uh
i'm very happy because i i i heard you a
few years ago with aubry marcus then i
read your books and now i i hear you
speak directly to me and i feel very
excited thank you
regarding the this uh activism and i
think like basically you know evolution
probably is one of the largest forces on
earth in life
and it makes sense to to give an
evolutionary explanation to a disease
that it's it's as big as it is and you
know what i also
find interesting because i'm a
sociologist and this explanation of
atavism and basically dusting off the
instruction
the genetic instructions when we were
unicellular organisms
triggered by this chronic
sublethal
stress that we are exposed to is
basically just telling us when in danger
just just go into survival mode and kill
everyone because you need to survive
like when we were unicellular organisms
and when you use those words to describe
it you can't really hide from the fact
that you can also explain this not only
at the biological genetical cellular
level but also on the sociological and
even environmental
realms of reality where it seems that
even the human species is in a sense
reverting
to that primitive state and we're
putting in danger our society and the
planet now those those themes you know
that's a huge topic those things i think
with science what you kind of learn to
respect is that there's a consistency in
the themes of nature right and
when you look at how life evolved again
back from unicellular to multicellular
and then up this ladder of incredible
complexity to this this pink ape that
can think for itself and and now now
he's in a cave and he's inventing tools
he's using tools they learn to
communicate from there you fast forward
to today and think of what's happened
the technology the building of
civilizations right and that's another
theme i mean to go from unicellular life
to a multicellular organism where you
have a division of labor a liver cell is
doing a very specific function a neuron
is doing a very specific job and now you
have human beings that are doing the
same thing almost like cells you have
somebody in ai you have somebody you
know sweeping the streets so it's a
theme right and i you can't separate the
two they're both evolutionary paradigms
and i you know from this point we can be
optimistic of the future we can be very
pessimistic i think every generation
feels that and i don't know what's going
to happen victor i don't know
i don't know where we evolve from here
as a collective i guess i don't know how
what's your opinion on this i haven't
really heard you talk about this but in
a sense
feeling that or thinking that cancer is
not this foreign invader who's really
messing up with ourselves in a sense
it's an evolutionary response to
survival based on the current situations
of our environment i think it can also
help us to
de-demonize cancer and probably not be
so afraid of something so foreign and
also understand that if it's coming from
us maybe there's a message there maybe
there's there's there's some teachings
that we can really learn uh not only in
terms of our emotional reaction to the
disease but also obviously in terms of
how we characterize cancer in the
society in marketing and all those
things and reappropriate those meanings
as part of this evolutionary story
because it's also a story of how we have
been talking about the disease all along
uh you know historically it's always
been framed as a war and that kind of
came from the single cell hypothesis
that unless you kill every single cancer
cell in a patient you're going to lose
the war because that one cell can come
divide you can have a recurrence and
death and they've you know they get
better at at dealing with chemotherapy
as the time goes on so it was framed as
a war you gotta cut slash and burn was
kind of the jargon that oncologists use
cut it out burn it with radiation and
poison it i'm sorry it was cut slash and
poison and that that was the approach to
cancer therapies for a long long time in
the 60s at the nci they pushed
chemotherapy to absolute limits it was
an
experimental you know time where a lot
more was loud more permissive and they
would push patients to the brink of
death and they really only were able to
make a significant progress on a handful
of cancers and then the utility of
high-dose chemo was really realized at
that time period i agree we need to stop
thinking of it as a war to kill every
single cell because when you look at
cancer more as an epigenetic or
metabolic disease where gene expression
has gone wrong
what about engaging cancer cells in the
sort of diplomacy where you shift that
gene expression back to behaving like a
normal cell and that has been shown to
be entirely possible there's a new
classes of epigenetic drugs there's all
kinds of lifestyle things people should
know about but don't get exposed to if
you have insulin resistance which 80 of
the us population does to some degree
that is highly prognostic of cancer
outcomes that's something we can all
deal with very simply through lifestyle
and all kinds of things like that and
sociologically right um people we're not
just individuals we we are again we're
back to this idea we're a collective
people that report being lonely that are
not happy because they're lonely have
very significantly worse
prognostic outcomes than people that are
not so there's all there's a whole
different side the way you could frame
the way you approach cancer treatment
yeah and you know coming from this
bacteriological paradigm of disease in
general we're also seeking that foreign
agent like a bacteria or a virus and one
we want to kill it but we we seldom
think about this theory of the of the
seed and the soil and what's what's the
soil and how can we empower and boost
the soil not only individually but
collectively so that these things don't
really proliferate and that's why i
think stories are so important because
in a sense we have always separated
biology and genetic and genetic and
physiology like those are things that
scientists in hospitals and labs are
working on and words meanings
advertising marketing and even political
discourses are really separated from
that but for example you think about the
placebo effect and you see it in action
like like a smile like a dance like even
a political or an advertising campaign
can prompt uh changes in our physiology
in our genes so
i don't like when when we dismiss
stories as nice things but as if they
were separated from reality where do you
find this connection between the power
of narrative and words with the the
materiality of cells now that's a
fascinating question you know most of
the time scientists are reductionists
they're looking at well if i add
compound a to a cancer cell what does it
do and and go from there and that's how
they approach
sort of scientific research and then
therapies but you're right there's a big
broader sort of narrative to to
therapies in general to being what is it
to be a healthy person and so on and
surprisingly and i learned this in my
second book curable that the biggest
determinant of how long you're going to
live is social is is the amount of of
close contacts you have in other words
the people you count on the most that
you can go to for a loan your close
family and friends and the second is
something called social integration so
it's as you move through your day in
your life how much social contact you
have with the world right you chat with
the mailman kind of those type of things
and those those two by far the biggest
determinants of health they will tell
you that if you don't have those if you
feel like you don't have those and it's
kind of individual based it's not
absolute it's not a number it's
introverts need less of that than
extroverts right so but people that
report loneliness um have a 50 higher
risk of death before 70. now to put that
in perspective what we consider public
health enemy number one obesity obesity
only confers a 30 chance of risk of
death before 70. so it's a huge huge
determinant how do we factor that into
into you know
this goes to cancer too women that
report lonely for breast cancer have
recurrence rates are higher
median survival is lower there's a
fascinating experiment with rats where
which are highly social creatures where
they group them in cages of four and
these are rats that are prone to mammary
cancer and then the other rats were left
in cages isolated and they just watched
them over time and then autopsied them
the rats that were
left alone experienced it was i three
thousand and some percent
more tumors mammary tumors and i think a
hundred percent 135 percent bigger size
of each tumor so that's an
underappreciated a sort of narrative i
think is what you're asking of our lives
it gets lost in that reductionism of
science i agree and when whenever we see
this complexity and we want to
interconnect all these things narrative
biology genetics social determinants of
health public policy uh
environment and we want to go to those
scientists who are reductionists they're
very they're very important and they're
very necessary but at the same time they
have this this analytical way of of
reducing everything to a single cause to
a single effect how can we be as
paradigm shifters if if we can use that
adjective critical of those positions
how can we show them that they are in a
sense blind to all these
interconnections without being so
forceful without mocking them without
because that that really generates more
uh separation and i sometimes hear of
all these new doctors talking about the
new metabolic
paradigm of cancer and we can't really
restrain ourselves and not be
very critical and even
like
you know we have narratives that might
expose people in an emotional way
instead of an intellectual way and that
really separates us in research and in
community how can we push for new
paradigms without criticizing in a bad
way the paradigm that we want to
supersede that's a great great question
you know you look at the history of
science and any paradigm shift in
science was a battle i i shouldn't say
all of them but the majority especially
in health are protracted battles and
there was a there was a classic one that
called the oxfoss wars where peter
mitchell first proposed that
mitochondria generate energy through
this crazy chemical process called the
chemo osmotic gradient
nothing like that have been proposed
before which is
all we knew at the time was basic
substrate chemistry right atp had to be
created by one single chemical reaction
so he came up with this idea no there's
this intricate elaborate thing that goes
on the mitochondria where we pump
hydrogens into the space and it creates
this like balloon you know it expands
and then there's force coming back down
because of the pressure and this spins
this wheel of atp synthase which creates
atp and
people said he was insane and people
would go to these conferences because
fights would break out and it became
personal they attacked him personally
and i've a couple friends that actually
knew peter mitchell at johns hopkins and
peter would go and just seek solace in
the office and they'd say peter we know
you're right you just have to hang in
there. and i don't like to frame i don't
like
sort of tom seyfried's image of cancer
framed as haha look this is correct you
guys got it wrong science does not need
to proceed that way it's a democratic
process where we just look at this and
talk and i think it comes a lot on the
individual right how they present it how
they frame it are they doing it
antagonistically or not i think you're
right victor that things have changed
where
that we used to have sort of common a
common
source of information you know and
journalistically we'd watch the nightly
news and it was the same anchors and we
all watched that now
newspapers are gone they're heading the
way of the dinosaurs we get our
information from the sources that we
want to get it from and it's just this
constant reinforcement bias and it tends
to devolve into this tribalism of us
against them and i think that's
happening in every aspect and it's
really imperative on us to not i just
don't participate in it and i refuse to
so same thing with science these
paradigm shifts need to be approached in
a just a delicate you know very
empathetic way yeah it's very easy to
criticize the the bad ceo who's i don't
know pouring chemicals in the river or
selling cheap and junk food to the
public just because he wants to get rich
or the corrupt politician or even the
responsible individual who's not who can
stop eating like those are reductionists
blaming instances where it's easy to
fall on them they makes perfect sense
but they don't construct anything rather
they they really separate us and i think
you in your one of your books you talked
about the problem with with free for
service in a specific hospital i think
it was the reading hospital where they
have a culture you know they wanted to
maximize the scans or or certain
procedures and they were building more
than
they were really needed but it's let's
talk about that example and not really
seeing that there's there's bad people
bad doctors bad administrators there but
but basically a system of how we are
doing things yeah that that's a great
one to bring up that was a fascinating
case study right where doctors have
known for a long time that it's kind of
hard to diagnose when to put a stent in
or when to do heart surgery and so in
redding california what happened was
it's a clinic a cardiovascular clinic
there and patients would come in at any
tiny radiological sign of heart disease
they would immediately shuffle that
patient to the operating table i mean it
was so far beyond what anyone else was
doing they're basically operating on
almost everybody and their data started
to look better because they're operating
on people that are entirely healthy so
no fewer and fewer people are dying
they're like look we're doing the right
thing when regulators finally caught
wind of what they were doing
automatically as they assumed oh these
guys are just fleecing the
fee-for-service system they're doing
this to make money right and the
journalists at doug deeper realized that
wasn't the case at all these guys were
not financially motivated simply a
culture had developed this sort of
peer-to-peer reinforcement that they
thought they were doing the right thing
there really wasn't any bad guys these
guys genuinely believe they were doing a
service for humanity even so far as one
of the uh people in the c-suite flew his
wife or i'm sorry his mother in from
chicago to be operated on because he
thought these surgeons were the best in
the country so that's an example of yeah
you just can't judge things from the
outside you don't know where things have
gone wrong the flip side of that was
macallan texas right where you looked at
the medicare reimbursements rates and
per medicare patient it was fifteen
thousand dollars which is double the
normal amount in the u.s and you go down
about 800 miles to el paso texas same
demographic same same socio-economic
status the utilization rate's 8 000. so
it was double that so what was going on
in mcallen they went down there and they
found out it really was a culture of
money the doctors had this very strong
entrepreneurial and they competed with
each other they were you know looking at
each other's how much they were making
and so this spun out of control to where
these guys really were for you know
fraudulent frauding the system and just
over treating to an insane degree and
again the regulators came down on them
journalists wrote great pieces on them
and that worked you know shining a light
on when people are doing
bad like that just sterilizes it they
then they they fixed it back to regular
utilization rates but you know it
healthcare is such a broad thing that
can go wrong in so many ways it's
operating under uncertainty and human
beings we know are not very good at that
and so
there's ways to move forward but i think
it's going to take a long time
that's why i think it's fascinating that
you brought in uh kaneman and versky to
your one of your latest books because
you know if if we want to challenge
dogma and if we want to see those blind
spots and all this uh inefficient way of
doing things in the huge healthcare
system we really need to understand
cognitive biases and the funny and
ironic thing is even if we understand
them we can really prevent them we
cannot so what do you like about this
heuristic cognitive biases
seeking and then how can we convert
those those findings into
into new procedures processes or
policies to sidetrack them yeah no well
there's some good examples of how to do
it right and and one of those is
intermountain health and utah and they
they do it right if every every hospital
every the entire us health care system
adopted their model instantly tomorrow
we'd save 40 percent and have better
outcomes right now we spend almost 20
percent of our gdp on healthcare double
what most western nations spend and have
the worst life expectancy in all western
world so clearly just from the top down
we're doing something very very wrong
the way they approach healthcare and
that way i think it's got to evolve is
healthcare evolved go back thousands of
years to the greek hippocrates and he
had a statement that a physician's
judgment matters more than any external
measurement so we have this ethos of the
doctor as this autonomous island of
sovereignty where they just operate
completely independently now of course
we've developed specialties from there
surgeons radiologists and so forth but
we need to go even further from that we
need to have the infrastructure help
doctors with the complexity they face
day to day you know medicine back in the
days of hypocrisy hippocrates looks
nothing like today we have six thousand
drugs that are approved in various
agencies something like 9000 procedures
and diagnostic procedures there's no way
that physicians can handle that
complexity so at intermountain what they
do is infrastructure works to reduce
that complexity to help that decision
making under uncertainty for example
nobody knew the best time to give
antibiotics pre-operatively was it 24
hours before the surgeon started to cut
was it 24 hours after everybody just
kind of ballparked it nobody knew and so
what they do at intermountain they do
this brilliantly day-to-day on all these
things where there is any uncertainty is
they just look at the medical records
and they they look at they have doctors
that did it 24 hours before doctors 24
to 48 hour hours after then they
determined by the medical records that
you could reduce surgical infections by
half if you did it 24 hours before so
they constrict that decision making
under uncertainty provide guard rails
for the physicians now some physicians
push back and say you're reducing our
autonomy it's our our intuition that
matters well no the data is clear in
many cases your intuition can be much
worse right
so
we can do that with data make these
guardrails where it matters but then you
know there is something magical about
human intuition where they have that
intimate bond with relationship with a
patient and then we can let that
flourish under those guard rails and say
this is what you need to focus on that
intuition we have your back on these
other areas of uncertainty and there's
so many examples where just tradition
you know
has dictated medical procedures like for
forever for advanced kidney cancer it
was thought that you know you need to
take out the kidney then in 2018 they
finally did a trial and said no removing
the kidneys no better than just the
chemotherapy they're already getting and
usually it's less is more we're using
most cases we're over treating so we
need these kind of comparative trials to
show us what works and what doesn't and
then you know give physicians help to
where they don't have to make decisions
under where it's a judgment all the time
and it's not known if it's right or not
judgment i think uh the new paradigms
are you know very much reliant on
finding these balances between how much
attention we put to data and all these
marvelous things that we can now do with
artificial intelligence and and big data
and and machine learning and also pair
it with human artistic intuition like
there's there's a balance there to be uh
cherished and not trying to just reduce
it to one or the other and you mentioned
a pivotal word there which is
sovereignty like the doctor wants to be
sovereign of its own decisions and i
think that's great but in i think in
general we are what we're seeing in this
in this understanding of collective
producing health is that the sovereignty
is at all times in many heads like in
doctors in governments in teachers and
educational institutions parents
patients like every one of us has to
understand that we are sovereign and
that we are responsible for our on the
health of others and that's also a thing
of narrative not outsourcing your health
to uh to your government or an outside
institution or person and really
reappropriating this sense of health
it's created by me
for us by us in a sense how do you see
this discourse of empowerment of
distributed empowerment i must say to
create new ways of of science and
technology to come together yeah that
great question you know back to the
first part where you're talking about
the sovereignty and human intuition and
there's a very interesting example of
that where you know ai has gotten so
good at computer chess it can beat most
grand masters but there's a new form of
chess called advanced chess where the
best chess players in the world pick
their ai program and then play alongside
it and they're they've played alongside
it so much that they can identify when
it might be getting it just a little bit
wrong so there's an element of human
tuition
that combination is better than the best
ai programs in the world so i think
that's a beautiful example of how this
can sort of exist together right you
know as far as
taking it you know taking control of our
own health i think that's is so critical
for everybody and i don't know how to
solve that you know we don't again we
don't know typically what matters for
our own health i think there's there's a
lot of miseducation of that it's funny
when you interview super centenarians
people that live over 110 that's one out
of every seven million people you ask
them what made you live this long and
you get answers from i drink dr pepper
to one guy was 12 cigars a day and
whiskey at night another's um sunbathing
nude just you know and the truth is they
have no idea why they lived that long
they that's where human bias comes in i
think it was the dr pepper the hogshead
cheese was one answer and but again
approaching that question from
epidemiology we know what matters it's
interconnectedness the blue zones where
people live the longest it's not the
food it's the density of architecture
and the
focus on people stopping by extended
family i think people knowing this
designing our communities being involved
in the community is critical you know
that it's not the we don't need to
stress about the little things another
much did i exercise at the right time
did i eat the right exact thing that's
really not what matters the most right
so i think just it's got to be
educational i think we just need how to
learn to live better what matters and
there's also this need to to like find
the thing that is going to make the
biggest change like one thing like one
cause and it's i think it's it's getting
to be more comfortable with to the fact
that there there are a lot of things
that make you healthy and live longer
you know the the best way you can have a
balance between all of them that's
better because even in marketing we want
to reduce it to one single thing uh my
product my exercise my diet whatever and
that's that's also uh reductionist which
is something that we want to to step out
from tell us about your foundation and
what do you do in your foundation and
why did you change the name oh the name
yeah the so the foundation i started
when i wrote tripping over the truth and
it's the idea was a lot of the therapies
that approach the metabolism of cancer
are essentially patent you can't patent
them they're free so it's very hard to
get funding right so we were looking at
ketogenic diets which have shown promise
for cancer looking at drug repurposing
that kind of thing and so it kind of had
to be a grassroots effort so i thought
if people were inspired by the book they
could donate to this foundation and it's
turned out to be you know
way surprised my expectations of what i
thought it would do so we've had some
very generous philanthropists we're
trying to fund a huge ketogenic diet
study for brain cancer cedar cyanide
that would be profound to show if you
could really change outcomes by just a
dietary shift right and it's free people
can learn it and do it on their own so
that's what we're doing
the name change
came from i didn't want people to get
the impression the original name was
single cause single cure i didn't want
again back to this kind of where people
can devolve into this tit-for-tat war i
didn't want them to think that we were
espousing a single cause and a single
cure even you know i i there's gonna be
obviously combination therapies multiple
hopefully we get to multiple things like
that and single cause is still up for
debate we right i mean i think we're
getting closer to what we know a cancer
is through these sort of paradigm shifts
but i don't think we're there yet to say
we have a sin we know what the single
cause is i'm not an expert but you know
in this interdisciplinary co-creation of
new paradigms i i must say that to me it
makes a lot of sense that not only
cancer but many other diseases are
basically this exposure to constant
stress which is sublethal and what we're
finding is that stress comes in
different ways like from a toxic
thing that we can ingest in our food or
water to uh toxic uh feeling like we
can't really
apologize to someone or even receive the
apology from someone to
um whatever we're eating the
electromagnetic field we are living on
so that's the thing like many things are
stressing us and we will need science
and intuition to look for those and and
the funny thing is that we won't be able
to reduce or eliminate everything so in
a sense it's also making friends with
all these things that are making us
stressful as a society and
using
our narrative to accept how things are
like yeah what happens if you're in an
airport and there's nothing to eat and
you haven't eaten for for 24 hours and
there's only french fries should you
take it or should you not take it and
probably it's probably you don't know if
it's better or worse but the narrative
about those french fries that you
wouldn't like to eat might be also
endangering in in terms of stress like
if you don't eat anything it might be
also dangerous so
like like you're talking about this
balance and it's also about not knowing
as you have referenced so being open to
the unknown and playing with that
without uncertainty is is i think
another um stepping stone into new
paradigms you know victor there's
interesting studies on stress that are
to me just absolutely fascinating so
the study looked at i think 40 000
people and they've rated their level of
stress high
moderate or low and then they just
tracked them and and counted who died
and who didn't die the people with the
highest level of stress had a high much
higher death rate than the people with
the lowest amount except the people that
thought stress was not bad for their
bodies
right yeah they had actually the lowest
death rate even the people that reported
low stress so how can that be and then
you look at okay what happens in the
stress response what happens is you pump
out adrenaline we're all familiar with
that feeling your heart rate goes up
your blood pressure you feel
uncomfortable but you also pump out
oxytocin so stress prompts you oxytocin
is the love hormone it makes you more
empathetic makes you reach out to be
more social if you seize on that you
know when you're going through a divorce
i you know i've seen my friends do it
they reach out they want to talk they
just want to talk about it and so when
you do that when you reach out you
become more empathetic and you help
people that are also stressed your
stress then your your death rate goes
back to baseline right so it's it's
everyone thinks oh i'm feeling the
stress it's horrible for me no it is
gearing you up to face whatever
challenge you're facing it's not going
to hurt you right and it's you you need
to follow the cues of stress you need to
reach out and and that is therapeutic in
itself so yeah our bodies were designed
to go through stress and i think it's
something we don't need to worry about
we just need to listen to it travis i
want to thank you for this amazing
conversation this uh you know we really
touched upon different subjects but
they're all related and i wanted to ask
uh what are your next steps if you could
write like let's say that you'll write
i don't know three more books in the
next five years
what would be those about oh my goodness
you know i think i'm like you victor i'm
just i'm a curious person so i'm always
just i go from one thing to the next and
i get fascinated right the cancer story
is becoming more and more fascinating as
we learn more so i've always thought
about doing sort of a sequel to tripping
over the truth and where we are now you
know the second book curable again
there's so much content in that book
about how the healthcare system's gone
wrong and again individually what can we
learn about epidemiological data for our
own health that's still a changing story
with tons of fascinating things coming
out
i guess i haven't when i write a book i
always take a long pause and just sort
of see what comes next and i'm still in
that see what comes next phase right now
how has your personal life changed in
the past 10 years based on the research
you've done and the works you've
published and the people you've talked
to
in terms of your routine your habits
your relationship with your kids yeah
good question you know so i'm 50 now and
i think that at my age my kids are you
know they've left the house or in
college or doing their thing
you just realize how fleeting i felt
like my kids were little forever how
fleeting life is how fast it goes i know
that's a cliche everybody says that but
what really matters
you realize is just the relationships
like when i wrote the book tripping over
the truth the relationship that i
developed from the people i met from
that from with tom seyfried i'm able to
help him out through the foundation i
just cherish those things and that's
really all that matters right the
day-to-day you know i think we all have
to go through that but you just have to
that's what matters is this collective
effort and and there's nothing better
than having a engage like this
conversation right things like this i
just cherish things like this yeah i i'd
say that i'd follow the same the same uh
path of just following my curiosity but
then what you find is that i always
paraphrase uh gabriel garcia marquez a
colombian writer who said that he only
writes book to have so that his his
friends love him more
that's a beautiful way to look at it
yeah every book that i've written has
come with long-term friendships the
people that are in the book so yeah i
just
you know and i think the lesson there is
just engage the world i never regret not
trying something right i regret i i do
regret the things that i have not tried
so don't be afraid to engage and if you
feel stressed from it again back to the
stressing that's a good thing the stress
you can you can handle it you might
trust your body to handle it thank you
travis for this conversation i'm very
happy that you responded to an open
email i sent to your publisher you never
know if those are are being seen or not
and and as you say that that reply was
just your openness to keep meeting
people having interest in conversation
and just building relationships for the
future so i'm happy to now call you my
friend i hope you can call me your
friend too and i'm sure we'll be talking
a lot for the for the next few years and
you can count on me and this old
audience for whatever we can help in
your in your cause your foundation and
the way you are putting forward your
knowledge and and your epiphanies thank
you victor i appreciate it yeah we'll
stay in touch we'll keep chatting have a
great day thank you
[Music]
you